{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-ItalicMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldItalicMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red31\green31\blue31;\red255\green255\blue255;\red254\green229\blue105;
\red0\green0\blue0;\red79\green79\blue79;\red33\green99\blue173;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c16078\c16078\c16078;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c100000\c90980\c48627;
\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c38431\c38431\c38431;\cssrgb\c15686\c47059\c73333;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The route of the\'a0\cb4 \strokec5 Exodus\cb3 \strokec2 \'a0depends largely on two factors: where the Egyptian capital was at the time, and the identification of the body of water where the crossing occurred. Since the inspired Christian Greek Scriptures use the expression \'93Red Sea,\'94 there is every reason to believe that it was that body of water that Israel crossed.\'a0
\fs26 \cf6 \cb1 \strokec6 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \strokec2 As for the Egyptian capital, the most likely site is Memphis, the principal seat of government during most of Egypt\'92s history. (See\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/tc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/6"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 MEMPHIS}}.) If this was the case, then the starting point of the\'a0\cb4 \strokec5 Exodus\cb3 \strokec2 \'a0march must have been sufficiently near Memphis for Moses to have been called before Pharaoh after midnight on Passover night and then to have reached Rameses in time to begin the march toward Succoth before the 14th day of Nisan ended. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/51/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 12:29-31,}}{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/51/1"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 \'a037,}}{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/51/2"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 \'a041,\'a042}}) The oldest Jewish tradition, recorded by Josephus, is to the effect that the march began a short distance N of Memphis. \'97
\f1\i Jewish Antiquities,
\f0\i0 \'a0II, 315 (xv,\'a01).\
A route through the Wadi Tumilat would be so far to the N of Memphis as to make the above circumstances impracticable. For this reason, many earlier commentators have suggested one of the well-known \'93pilgrim\'94 routes through Egypt, such as the el Haj route leading from Cairo across to Suez (ancient Clysma, later Kolsum) at the head of the Gulf of Suez.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\f2\i\b \cf2 Where was the Red Sea parted to allow Israel to cross over?
\f0\i0\b0 \
It should be noted that, after reaching the second stage of their journey, Etham \'93at the edge of the wilderness,\'94 God ordered Moses to \'93turn back and encamp before Pihahiroth .\'a0.\'a0. by the sea.\'94 This maneuver would cause Pharaoh to believe the Israelites were \'93wandering in confusion.\'94 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/52/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 13:20;}}{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/52/1"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 \'a014:1-3}}) Scholars favoring the el Haj route as the likely one point out that the Hebrew verb for \'93turn back\'94 is emphatic and does not mean merely to \'93divert\'94 or \'93turn aside,\'94 but has more the sense of returning or at least of a marked detour. They suggest that, upon reaching a point N of the head of the Gulf of Suez, the Israelites reversed their line of march and went around to the E side of Jebel \uc0\u701 Ataqah, a mountain range bordering the W side of the Gulf. A large host, such as the Israelites were, would find no effective way for swift exit from such a position if pursued from the N, and hence they would be bottled up with the sea blocking their way.\
Jewish tradition of the first century C.E. conveys such a picture. (See\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/tc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/7"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 PIHAHIROTH}}.) But, more importantly, such a situation fits the general picture portrayed in the Bible itself, whereas the popular views of many scholars do not. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/53/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:9-16}}) It seems evident that the crossing must have been far enough from the head of the Gulf (or western arm of the Red Sea) that Pharaoh\'92s forces would not have been able simply to circle the end of the Gulf and easily come upon the Israelites on the other side. \'97{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/54/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:22,\'a023}}.\
Pharaoh had changed his mind about the release of the Israelites as soon as he learned of their departure. Certainly the loss of such a slave nation meant a heavy economic blow to Egypt. It would not be difficult for his chariots to overtake this entire nation on the move, particularly in view of their \'91turning back.\'92 Now, encouraged by the thought that Israel was wandering in confusion in the wilderness, he went after them with confidence. With a crack force of 600 chosen chariots, all the other chariots of Egypt mounted with warriors, his cavalrymen, and all his military forces, he came upon Israel at Pihahiroth. \'97{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/55/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:3-9}}.\
Strategically the position of the Israelites looked very bad. They were evidently hemmed in between the sea and the mountains, with the Egyptians blocking the way back. In their apparently trapped position, fear struck the hearts of the Israelites and they began to complain against Moses. Now God stepped in to protect Israel by moving the cloud from the front to the rear. On one side, toward the Egyptians, it was darkness; on the other it kept lighting up the night for Israel. While the cloud held back the Egyptians from attacking, at Jehovah\'92s command Moses lifted his rod, and the seawaters split apart, leaving the dry seabed as a path for Israel. \'97{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/56/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:10-21}}.\

\f2\i\b Width and depth of place of crossing.
\f0\i0\b0 \'a0Since Israel crossed the sea in one night, it could hardly be assumed that the waters parted in a narrow channel. Rather, the channel may have been a kilometer or more in width. Though in fairly close marching formation, such a group, along with what wagons they had, their baggage, and their cattle, even when rather closely ranked, would occupy an area of perhaps 8 sq\'a0km (3 sq\'a0mi) or more. It appears, therefore, that the sea-opening allowed the Israelites to cross on a fairly wide front. If there was about a 1.5-km (1\'a0mi) front, then the depth of the Israelite column would probably be about 5\'a0km (3\'a0mi) or more. If it was about a 2.5-km (1.5\'a0mi) front, the depth might be about 3\'a0km (2\'a0mi) or more. It would take such a column several hours to get into the seabed and travel across it. While they did not go in panic, but maintained their battle formation, they would no doubt move with considerable haste.\
Had it not been for the cloud, the Egyptians would have easily overtaken and slaughtered\'a0
\fs26 \cf6 \cb1 \strokec6 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf6 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \strokec2 many. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/57/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 15:9}}) When the Israelites had gone into the sea and the cloud behind them had moved ahead to reveal this fact to the Egyptians, they pursued. Here, again, is emphasized the necessity of considerable breadth and length of dry seabed, for Pharaoh\'92s military force was great. Bent on destruction and recapture of their former slaves, the entire force went well into the seabed. Then, during the morning watch, which ran from about 2:00 to 6:00\'a0a.m., Jehovah looked out from the cloud and began to throw the camp of the Egyptians into confusion, taking the wheels off their chariots. \'97{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/58/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:24,\'a025}}.\
The Israelites, by the approaching of morning, got safely across on the eastern shore of the Red Sea. Then Moses was commanded to stretch his hand out so that the waters would come back over the Egyptians. At this \'93the sea began to come back to its normal condition,\'94 and the Egyptians fled from encountering it. This also would indicate that the waters had opened up widely, for a narrow channel would have immediately overwhelmed them. The Egyptians fled from the enclosing walls of water toward the western bank, but the waters kept converging until their depth completely covered all the war chariots and the cavalrymen belonging to Pharaoh\'92s military forces; not so much as one of them was let remain.\
It is obvious that such an overwhelming inundation would be impossible in a marsh. Moreover, in a shallow marsh dead bodies would not wash up on the shore, as actually took place, so that \'93Israel got to see the Egyptians dead on the seashore.\'94 \'97{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/59/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:22-31}}; MAP and PICTURE, Vol.\'a01, p.\'a0537.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\f2\i\b \cf2 Waters \'93congealed.\'94
\f0\i0\b0 \'a0According to the Bible description, the surging waters were congealed to let Israel pass through. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/60/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 15:8}}) This word \'93congealed\'94 is used in the\'a0
\f1\i American Standard Version,
\f0\i0 \'a0the\'a0
\f1\i King James Version,
\f0\i0 \'a0and translations by J.\'a0N.\'a0Darby, I.\'a0Leeser, R.\'a0Knox, and J.\'a0Rotherham. As defined in\'a0
\f1\i Webster\'92s Third New International Dictionary
\f0\i0 \'a0(1981), congeal means \'93to change from a fluid to a solid state by or as if by cold\'a0.\'a0.\'a0.\'a0: freeze\'a0.\'a0.\'a0.\'a0: to make (a liquid) viscid or of a consistency like jelly: curdle, coagulate.\'94 The Hebrew word here translated \'93congealed\'94 is used in\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/61/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Job 10:10}}\'a0with regard to curdling milk. Therefore, it does not of necessity mean that the walls of water were frozen solid, but that the consistency of the congealed substance may have been like gelatin or curds. Nothing visible was holding back the waters of the Red Sea on each side of the Israelites, hence the water had the appearance of being congealed, stiffened, curdled, or thickened so that it could remain standing like a wall on each side and not collapse in an inundation upon the Israelites, to their destruction. This was how they looked to Moses when a strong E wind divided the waters and dried up the basin so that it was not miry, nor frozen, but was easily traversable by the multitude.\
The pathway opened in the sea was wide enough that the Israelites, numbering possibly three million, could all cross to the eastern banks by morning. Then the congealed waters began to be released and to move in from either side, surging and overwhelming the Egyptians as Israel stood on the eastern bank contemplating Jehovah\'92s unparalleled deliverance of an entire nation from a world power. They realized the literal fulfillment of Moses\'92 words: \'93The Egyptians whom you do see today you will not see again, no, never again.\'94 \'97{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/62/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 14:13}}.\
So by a spectacular display of power Jehovah exalted his name and delivered Israel. Safe on the E shore of the Red Sea, Moses led the sons of Israel in a song, while his sister Miriam, the prophetess, took a tambourine in her hand and led all the women with tambourines and in dances, responding in song to the men. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/63/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 15:1,}}{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/63/1"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 \'a020,\'a021}}) A complete separation of Israel from their foes had been effected. When they went out from Egypt they were not allowed to suffer harm from man or beast; no dog even snarled at the Israelites or moved its tongue against them. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/64/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Ex 11:7}}) While the\'a0\cb4 \strokec5 Exodus\cb3 \strokec2 \'a0narrative does not mention that Pharaoh personally went into the sea with his military forces and was destroyed,\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://wol.jw.org/en/wol/bc/r1/lp-e/1200001458/65/0"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 \strokec7 Psalm 136:15}}\'a0does state that Jehovah \'93shook off Pharaoh and his military force into the Red Sea.\'94\
}